---
layout: post
title: "An Environment for Faith"
date: 2020-08-30
---

Harmoniously with my family, my faith forms the undercurrent of everything that means most to me in my life. It is only through long consideration, studying, and conversation that I have come to this faith. My wrestle with God involved a perceived tension between the intellectual and the spiritual, the age-long cliche that drives an ideological wedge between individuals, cities, and countries. My misunderstood perception of God and an overestimation of the current capabilities of the scientific method left me with a one-dimensional view of reality and truth. Following my understanding of the unity between the two, I arrived at my conviction of a God who is the ultimate intellect. As a purpose for this writing, I borrow the words of Austin Farrer - “Rational argument does not create belief, but it maintains a climate in which belief may flourish.” Here, I explain how I’ve accepted a divine Creator despite the growing opinion that such a belief is anti-science, ignorant, and morally incompatible.



With many different faiths ascribing different attributes to God, it’s important to begin by explaining some of the most fundamental precepts in my religion, the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints. “Our theology begins with heavenly parents. Our highest aspiration is to be like them.” Further, their aspiration is for us to be with them. I believe they had a plan for us from the beginning, one that needed the suffering and struggles of mortal life to mold us into beings exactly as they are, to return to them in a familial relationship. While I don’t understand why exact tragedies fall upon good people, I recognize that it wouldn’t make sense for a mortal being to dictate the reasoning of an omniscient being. I have come to know God through personal experience, along with scriptural tutoring. He is patient, kind, and fatherly. It is upon these characteristics that I can create a rational argument, any other description would give me a reason to pause with “serious consideration and great uneasiness”. 



My wife loves the outdoors, so we spend weekends hiking in the nearby mountains. Being a photographer also, she frequently stops to not only appreciate nature but to capture it. On the other hand, I’m often too concerned with finishing quickly that I am awestruck at the pictures she shows me afterward of views that I passed by, determined to finish in an allotted time. This acts as an analogy for the vast world of religious scholarship, something I ignorantly overlooked for the early period of my life. An iconoclastic nature is the most celebrated by our culture creators, which had me believe that pious people were ignorant, constantly pushing against the inevitable and conflicting domination of science. I was heavily influenced by this narrative, using it not only as "woke" points but also to appease my conscience that prompted me to live differently. And so I wandered, chasing truth by the elimination of a path based on a premise built not on reality, but perception. Unsurprisingly, I learned that critics can be deceptively convincing, and forming opinions based solely on critique (in contrast to personal investigation) makes truth elusive.  



Particularly lucid was a conversation I had with an uncle, who I told that religion wasn't for me because I was more "intellectual". Appalled, he started to name a few leaders of the *Church of Jesus Christ who were decorated in accomplishments from law to science. It was then that I began aggressively investigating this claim, finding names like Kim Clark (former dean of Harvard Business School), Dallin H. Oaks (University of Chicago Law Professor, Utah Supreme Court), Clayton Christensen (one of best business minds of his generation), and Henry Eyring (world-renowned physicist) among many others. Not only had these individuals accomplished everything I had wanted for myself, but many of them also sacrificed it all for the mission of this Church. Still grappling with this, I came upon a relatively young but rich world of Mormon scholarship, highlighted with names such as Hugh Nibley, Daniel Peterson, and W. Cleon Skousen. Again, these were exceptionally capable people who had devoted their lives to defending this faith. Again, these facts certainly don't prove the veracity of my faith, but certainly, their work contributes to a climate in which my faith may flourish. I couldn't continue on my throne of intellectual superiority and look down on the religious (as is the common mentality amongst critics), because I had read firsthand authors who stand in stark contrast to this idea. Confronted with this reality, I wondered what other ideas had I believed about religious people that were incorrect?



Another atheistic creed that I adopted was that Christianity was full of illogical or contradictory beliefs. For example, a benevolent creator of a world full of unfairness and atrocities (famously, "the problem of evil"), the creation story with the proven fact of human evolution, and imperfections of the bible. Often the premise of the dissenters was false, though their logic was sound. This is perfectly exemplified in the theories of Sam Harris. He assumes an almighty, angry God who used a lightning rod to discharge justice, I learned of a God who was interested, involved, and just. Not all questions were answered, some left to occupy the subconscious. These uncertainties are framed as imperfections when I see them as realities of any field of study. Indeed, I learned that to deny God's existence "... because we cannot comprehend the means.... is implying that what man cannot comprehend cannot be and that therefore he is able to comprehend is." By recognizing my arrogance and misplaced faith in the **current advances of science, I came to a point of reckoning. 



Some topics can be saturated with opinions of all kinds, both extreme and mild. There are very few things that require if understood correctly, an absolute stance. These shake the fence until you fall on one side or the other, though some fight to ignore the shaking. It was this constant annoyance that stayed with me because the ultimate argument with these respected individuals was never to trust only in their authority or superior intellect. They readily admitted that their explanations alone would be left wanting. Instead, they deferred to the famous invitation of the Book of Mormon - read it. So simple and bold, leaving each of us to our faculties and desires to decide for ourselves if this book could have been written by an uneducated boy in the 1800's. Usually, with convincing comes persuasive rhetoric, where the most articulate and evocative reigns supreme. However, though they are polished orators, they leave all that aside and simply ask for critics to openly read the Book of Mormon. Ultimately, it was a thoughtful reading and pondering of the content and implications of that book that cemented my spiritual assurance as well as intellectually stability as a believer. I would be hard-pressed to believe that someone could openly and rigorously read the verses of that Book and not conclude that at the very least it provides respectable ground upon which faith can be built.



Still, after discovering the compelling authors of religious scholarship and the miraculous transformation that ensued, I can sympathize with those who find themselves faithless. I cannot claim to have answers to every question confronting the history of my faith, nor the sensibility behind gruesome acts of violence towards the innocent. I frequently visit a desperate state, trying to change what I believe to be God's will. Reasons for ills are easier to apply in the aggregate than in loved ones, leading me to act as if my teaspoon of knowledge weighs more than God's oceans. Searching for ways to wrong this right, many non-believers look for concrete evidence, something I can't provide (giving a place for faith). Nonetheless, logic and reason are God-given characteristics of man which aid in fulfilling His promises to "reveal all mysteries... even the wonders of eternity." 



My journey continues, constantly marrying the recently discovered scientific truths with what I know to be eternal law.  I anxiously anticipate when our understanding will be enlightened to the point where there is no difference between the secular and the spiritual, when physics will be taught by God himself, and when mathematics is the language of creation.  I await that day, when every knee must bow and tongue confess that God is.  Until then, and in preparation for that time, I remember the words of Talmage, “Within the Gospel of Jesus Christ, there is room and place for every truth thus far learned by man or yet to be made known.”